>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, DECEMBER 21:
AUTHORITIES INVESTIGATE THE
MURDER OF TWO NEW YORK CITY
POLICE OFFICERS AND THE POSSIBLE
LINK TO RECENT PROTESTS AGAINST
POLICE.
THE NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS
BOARD FILES A FORMAL COMPLAINT
AGAINST McDONALD'S AND ITS
FRANCHISEES.
WHY IT MATTERS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THIS WHISTLEBLOWER HELPED THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RECOVER TENS
OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
A FEDERAL PROGRAM THAT BOTH
PARTIES AGREE WORKS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS DECRIED THE
MURDER OF TWO NEW YORK CITY
POLICE OFFICERS IN BROOKLYN
YESTERDAY.
AND SO DID THE FAMILIES OF
MICHAEL BROWN AND ERIC GARNER,
AFRICAN-AMERICANS WHOSE KILLINGS
BY WHITE POLICE OFFICERS SET OFF
NATIONWIDE PROTESTS.
BUT FORMER NEW YORK CITY MAYOR
RUDOLPH GIULIANI SAID TODAY THE
PROTESTS SEND THE MESSAGE THAT
"THE POLICE ARE BAD, THE POLICE
ARE RACIST," A CONCLUSION, HE
SAID, THAT IS COMPLETELY WRONG.
MEANWHILE, THE INVESTIGATION
INTO YESTERDAY'S INCIDENT IS
CONTINUING.
THE NEWSHOUR'S WILLIAM BRANGHAM
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: MOURNERS GATHERED
TODAY AT THE SCENE OF LAST
NIGHT'S KILLING OF THE TWO NEW
YORK CITY POLICE OFFICERS AND
RESIDENTS LAST NIGHT EXPRESSED
SHOCK AND ANGER.
>> AT THE END OF THE DAY, TWO
FAMILIES IS MISSING SOMEBODY FOR
THE HOLIDAYS, AND ITS WRONG!
>> WHAT ARE WE, LIVING IN DODGE
CITY OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
IT DOESN'T HAPPEN LIKE THIS.
WHO DOES THIS?
>> Reporter: OFFICERS RAFAEL
RAMOS AND WENJIAN LIU WERE SHOT
AT POINT BLANK RANGE, SITTING IN
THEIR PATROL CAR SATURDAY
AFTERNOON IN BROOKLYN.
>> OUR HEARTS OUR HEAVY.
WE LOST TWO GOOD MEN.
>> Reporter: THE SUSPECT-- 28
YEAR OLD ISMAAIYL BRINSLEY--
FLED TO A NEARBY SUBWAY STATION
AND SHOT HIMSELF FATALLY IN THE
HEAD.
EARLIER YESTERDAY, BRINSLEY--
WHO HAD A LONG CRIMINAL HISTORY-
- SHOT AND WOUNDED HIS
GIRLFRIEND IN THIS HOUSING
COMPLEX OUTSIDE BALTIMORE BEFORE
TRAVELING TO NEW YORK.
HE THEN POSTED A PHOTO ON
INSTAGRAM OF THE GUN HE WOULD
LATER USE TO MURDER THE
OFFICERS, INDICATING THE
SHOOTING WOULD BE REVENGE FOR
THE KILLINGS OF ERIC GARNER AND
MICHAEL BROWN-- TWO BLACK MEN
KILLED BY WHITE POLICE OFFICERS
EARLIER THIS YEAR.
HE WROTE "THEY TAKE ONE OF
OURS... WE TAKE TWO OF THEIRS.
SHOOT THE POLICE."
THE KILLING OF BROWN AND GARNER
AND THE DECISIONS BY GRAND
JURIES NOT TO INDICT THE
OFFICERS INVOLVED LED TO
NATIONWIDE DEMONSTRATIONS, AND
IN NEW YORK LED TO A PUBLIC
FALLOUT BETWEEN NEW YORK CITY
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO AND THE
POLICE UNION.
AFTER THE GARNER GRAND JURY
DECISION EARLIER THIS MONTH, DE
BLASIO SAID HE'D BEEN WARNING
HIS MIXED RACE SON DONTAE TO BE
WARY OF THE "DANGERS" HE MIGHT
FACE IN INTERACTIONS WITH
POLICE.
>> CHARLANE AND I HAVE HAD TO
TALK TO DONTAE FOR YEARS ABOUT
THE DANGERS HE MAY FACE.
>> Reporter: THAT PROMPTED NEW
YORK PATROLMEN'S BENEVOLENT
ASSOCIATION HEAD PATRICK LYNCH
TO SAY POLICE HAD BEEN "THROWN
UNDER THE BUS" BY THE MAYOR.
LYNCH TRIED TO GET DE BLASIO
BARRED FROM ATTENDING POLICE
FUNERALS.
AND THEN LAST NIGHT, FOLLOWING
THE KILLING OF THE TWO OFFICERS,
LYNCH SAID PROTESTORS AND PUBLIC
OFFICIALS HAD "BLOOD ON THEIR
HANDS."
>> THAT BLOOD ON THE HANDS
STARTS ON THE STEPS OF CITY HALL
IN THE OFFICE OF THE MAYOR.
>> Reporter: LAST NIGHT, WHEN
MAYOR DE BLASIO WENT TO THE
HOSPITAL WHERE THE OFFICERS HAD
BEEN TAKEN, POLICE OFFICERS
TURNED THEIR BACK ON HIM.
LATE THIS AFTERNOON, THE
N.Y.P.D.'S CHIEF OF DETECTIVES,
ROBERT BOYCE, KNOCKED DOWN
PUBLISHED REPORTS THAT BRINSLEY
MAY HAVE HAD TIES TO A MILITANT
PRISON GANG, BUT SAID HE'D MADE
ANTI-GOVERNMENT STATEMENTS ON
SOCIAL MEDIA.
>> THERE IS ONE WHERE HE BURNS A
FLAG AND MADE SOME STATEMENTS.
THERE'S OTHERS WITH TALKS OF
ANGER AT THE POLICE.
HE SPECIFICALLY MENTIONS MICHAEL
BROWN AND ERIC GARNER.
RIGHT NOW WE HAVE NO GANG
AFFILIATION AT ALL ATTRIBUTED TO
THIS MAN.
HE HAS NO TATTOOS TO SUGGEST
ANYTHING OF IT AND HE HAS NO
RELIGIOUS STATEMENTS THAT WE
FOUND ON INSTAGRAM AT ALL.
NONE WHATSOEVER.
>> Reporter: HE ALSO OFFERED A
GLIMPSE OF BRINSLEY'S UPBRINGING
AND MENTAL STATE.
>> HE HAD A VERY TROUBLED
CHILDHOOD AND WAS OFTEN VIOLENT.
MOTHER EXPRESSED FEAR OF HIM AND
SHE SAYS SHE HASN'T SEEN HIM IN
ONE MONTH.
BRINSLEY ATTEMPTED SUICIDE IN
THE PAST AND ATTEMPTED TO HANG
HIMSELF A YEAR AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE MORE
ON THE INVESTIGATION AFTER THE
NEWS SUMMARY.
IN AN INTERVIEW BROADCAST TODAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THE CYBER
ATTACK ON SONY PICTURES, WHICH
HIS ADMINISTRATION BLAMES ON
NORTH KOREA, SHOULD NOT BE
CONSIDERED AN ACT OF WAR, BUT HE
PROMISED TO RETALIATE JUST THE
SAME.
>> I DON'T THINK IT WAS AN ACT
OF WAR.
IT WAS AN ACT OF CYBER-VANDALISM
THAT WAS VERY COSTLY, VERY
EXPENSIVE.
WE TAKE IT VERY SERIOUSLY.
WE WILL RESPOND PROPORTIONALLY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A SEPARATE
INTERVIEW, THE REPUBLICAN
CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE, MIKE
ROGERS, DESCRIBED THE INCIDENT
AS A NATION-STATE ATTACK AND
SAID THE PRESIDENT COULD HAVE
RETALIATED ALREADY.
>> THE PROBLEM HERE WAS NOT THE
FACT THAT WE DIDN'T HAVE THE
CAPABILITY TO DO SOMETHING
NEARLY IN IMMEDIATE TIME, WE
JUST DIDN'T GET A DECISION FROM
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: FIVE C.I.A.
EMPLOYEES, BEING INVESTIGATED
FOR SECRETLY SEARCHING COMPUTERS
USED BY SENATE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE STAFFERS, REPORTEDLY
WILL NOT BE PUNISHED.
THIS, ACCORDING TO THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
AT THE TIME, THE SENATE STAFFERS
WERE INVESTIGATING THE C.I.A.,
AND ITS INTERROGATION AND
DETENTION PROGRAMS AFTER THE
SEPTEMBER 11TH ATTACKS.
THE TENTATIVE DECISION WAS
REACHED BY A PANEL HEADED BY
EVAN BAYH, THE FORMER DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR FROM INDIANA.
DOCUMENTS SUGGEST THE C.I.A.
EMPLOYEES, IN SOME INSTANCES,
WERE ACTING AT THE BEHEST OF
C.I.A. DIRECTOR JOHN BRENNAN WHO
APPOINTED THE MEMBERS OF THE
PANEL INVESTIGATING THE C.I.A.'S
ACTIONS.
THE UNITED STATES TODAY STRUCK
ISIS TARGETS IN IRAQ AND SYRIA.
THESE ARE SOME OF THE LOCATIONS
HIT DURING 13 AIRSTRIKES IN IRAQ
AND THREE IN SYRIA, ACCORDING TO
THE COMBINED JOINT TASK FORCE.
PRO-WESTERN KURDISH FORCES HAVE
MADE GAINS RECENTLY AGAINST ISIS
FIGHTERS IN NORTHERN IRAQ.
THERE HAS BEEN A FATAL TALIBAN
ATTACK ON POLICE IN NORTHERN
AFGHANISTAN.
AUTHORITIES SAY SEVEN POLICEMEN
WERE KILLED AND FIVE MORE
WOUNDED DURING THE INCIDENT LATE
LAST NIGHT.
IN A SEPARATE INCIDENT, SEVEN
CIVILIANS, INCLUDING A NUMBER OF
CHILDREN, WERE KILLED WHEN THEIR
VEHICLE STRUCK AN IMPROVISED
EXPLOSIVE DEVICE.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, THE PRICE
OF GAS CONTINUES TO PLUNGE.
ACCORDING TO TRIPLE "A," THE
AVERAGE PRICE OF A GALLON OF
REGULAR IS NOW JUST BELOW TWO
DOLLARS AND 41 CENTS A GALLON.
THAT MORE THAN 40 CENTS LESS
THAN IT WAS ONLY A MONTH AGO.
AND MORE THAN 80 CENTS LESS THAN
IT WAS A YEAR AGO.
THE SAUDI OIL MINISTER SAID
TODAY HIS COUNTRY WILL NOT CUT
PRODUCTION, EVEN IF OTHER
COUNTRIES DO.
AND IN WHAT IS BEING HAILED AS
THE FIRST IN A NEW CLASS OF
DRUGS, THE F.D.A. HAS APPROVED A
NEW TREATMENT FOR ADVANCED
OVARIAN CANCER.
THE DRUG LYNPARZA, MANUFACTURED
BY ASTRA ZENECA, WAS FOUND TO
SHRINK OVARIAN TUMORS IN MORE
THAN 30% OF WOMEN WHO HAD
A SPECIFIC GENETIC MUTATION.
FRIDAY'S DECISION CAME A DAY
AFTER THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION
APPROVED ITS USE.
ACCORDING TO THE NATIONAL CANCER
INSTITUTE, AN ESTIMATED 14,000
AMERICAN WOMEN DIED OF OVARIAN
CANCER THIS YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE LATEST
ABOUT THE MURDER OF THOSE TWO
NEW YORK CITY POLICE OFFICERS,
WE ARE JOINED NOW BY PERVAIZ
SHALLWANI.
HE IS THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
REPORTER FOR THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
SO WHAT ARE THE COPS ARE YOU
TALKING TO SAYING RIGHT TO
YOU?
>> THE TOP BRASS AT THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT ARE
TELLING OFFICERS, THAT YOU
KNOW, THEY NEED TO DO THEIR
JOBS AND NOT TO TAKE TO
SOCIAL MEDIA AND TO MOURN IN
PEACE.
BUT THERE ARE UNIONS OUT THERE
WHO ARE EXPRESSING, YOU KNOW, A
VERY DIFFERENT SENTIMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S UNION OR A
COUPLE OF THEM ACTUALLY EVEN
WENT OUT OF THEIR WAY TO SAY,
DON'T MAKE ARRESTS UNLESS
ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY.
AND DON'T GO OUT AND RESPOND
TO ANY CRIME UNLESS YOU'VE
GOT BACKUP WITH ANOTHER CAR.
>> THERE HAS BEEN SOME RUMOR,
THAT HASN'T COME OUT AS AN
OFFICIAL STATEMENT BUT THERE
HAS BEEN BEHIND THE SCENES
RUMBLINGS ABOUT THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, AND SO
WE'VE ALSO SEEN FORMER
OFFICIALS, FORMER MAYOR, RUDY
GIULIANI RECORDED EARLIER IN THE
STORY, BUT ALSO THE FORMER
GOVERNOR OF NEW YORK, GOVERNOR
PATAKI.
REALLY LAYING THE BLAME SQUARELY
ON THE MAYOR'S OFFICE AND ALL OF
THE PROTESTORS.
>> YEAH, THERE HAVE DEFINITELY
BEEN DISSENTING VOICES POLITICAL
AS WELL AS FORMER N.Y.P.D.,
TELLING-- SAYING THAT THIS IS
BECOMING A RIFT BETWEEN THE
MAYOR'S OFFICE AND THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HOW ABOUT
THE CONNECTIONS TO WHAT HAPPENED
IN BALTIMORE AT THIS POINT?
>> POLICE HAVE DETERMINED THAT
THE SUSPECT HAD SHOT AN EX-
GIRLFRIEND AT ABOUT 5:45, 6:00
IN THE MORNING, AND THEN A FEW
SEVERAL HOURS LATER LEARNED THAT
HE HAD MADE POSTINGS ON
INSTAGRAM SAYING THAT HE WAS
LOOKING TO KILL POLICE OFFICERS.
THEY WERE ABLE TO DETERMINE BY
CELL PHONE THAT HE WAS IN NEW
YORK CITY, AND AS WELL HAD SENT
OUT AND REACHED OUT TO THE
N.Y.P.D., SENT OUT A WANTED
POSTER TO THE N.Y.P.D. THAT
REACHED THE N.Y.P.D. RIGHT AS
THE SHOOTING WAS OCCURRING.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE BALTIMORE
POLICE DEPARTMENT GOT THE
MESSAGE TO THE N.Y.P.D. JUST TOO
LATE?
>> NOT NECESSARILY TOO LATE.
THEY GOT THE FIRST CONNECTION
SOUNDS LIKE BETWEEN THE
BALTIMORE POLICE DEPARTMENT AND
THE N.Y.P.D. WAS ABOUT 2:10.
BY THE TIME THERE WAS A WIDER
CONNECTION AND SENT OUT
DEPARTMENT WIDE WAS ABOUT 2:45
AND THE SHOOTING HAPPENED AT
ABOUT 2:47.
SO IT WAS HAPPENING RIGHT AS
THIS WAS OCCURRING.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT DO YOU
KNOW SO FAR ABOUT THE SUSPECT?
>> AT THIS POINT WE KNOW THE
SUSPECT HAS A EXTENSIVE
CRIMINAL HISTORY IN GEORGIA.
HAS SPENT SOME TIME IN JAIL.
HE'S ORIGINALLY FROM BROOKLYN.
AND APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN MOVING
AROUND QUITE A BIT OVER THE LAST
SEVERAL WEEKS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THAT CRIMINAL
PAST, ANY VIOLENT HIS HISTORY?
>> THERE IS QUITE A BIT OF A
VIOLENT HISTORY.
THERE ARE ALSO REPORTS THAT HE
HAS A MENTAL HEALTH HISTORY.
THE HISTORY INCLUDES EVERYTHING
FROM TERRORIST THREATS AS WELL
AS A PASS GUN POSSESSION CHARGE.
>> Sreenivasan: AL RIGHT,
PERVAIZ SHALLWANI THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
WE HEAR A LOT ABOUT HOW THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ISN'T
WORKING.
THE LAST SESSION OF CONGRESS WAS
REPORTEDLY THE SECOND LEAST
PRODUCTIVE IN MODERN TIMES.
BUT TONIGHT, OUR FOCUS IS ON A
LAW THAT MOST DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS AGREE IS WORKING,
ONE THAT BROUGHT NEARLY SIX
BILLION DOLLARS INTO THE FEDERAL
COFFERS LAST YEAR-- A RECORD.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT WHAT'S KNOWN
AS THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT.
IT INCENTIVIZES WHISTLEBLOWERS
TO COME FORWARD WITH THE PROMISE
OF A SIGNIFICANT REWARD FOR
THEMSELVES.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
RICK KARR REPORTS.
>> Reporter: FOR MOST OF THE
EIGHTEEN YEARS THAT SHE SPENT
WORKING FOR THE MEDICAL DEVICE
MANUFACTURER C.R. BARD NEAR
ATLANTA, JULIE DARITY SAYS SHE
HAD UNWAVERING FAITH IN THE
COMPANY'S INTEGRITY.
UPHOLDING IT WAS PART OF HER
JOB.
>> MY ENTIRE CAREER HAD BEEN
COMPLIANCE, AND MAKING SURE THAT
THINGS WERE DONE APPROPRIATELY,
ACCORDING TO THE REGULATIONS.
>> Reporter: YOU BELIEVED IN
THIS COMPANY, YOU THOUGHT THIS
COMPANY WAS DOING THE RIGHT
THING?
>> OH, I DID.
>> Reporter: BUT HER FAITH WAS
TESTED WHEN SHE STARTED WORKING
WITH A TEAM THAT SOLD
RADIOACTIVE PELLETS USED TO
TREAT PROSTATE CANCER.
IT WAS HER JOB TO REVIEW EVERY
TRANSACTION THE TEAM MADE AND
SHE BEGAN TO SUSPECT THEY'D
DEVELOPED A SCHEME TO OVERCHARGE
MEDICARE, WHICH PAID FOR MOST OF
THE PELLETS.
SHE SAYS SALES REPS PERSUADED
CUSTOMERS TO USE BARD'S PRODUCT
EVEN THOUGH IT WAS MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN THE COMPETITION'S
BY GIVING THEM FREE MEDICAL
EQUIPMENT, REBATES, AND GRANTS.
THE INCENTIVES CAME AT THE
EXPENSE OF TAXPAYERS, BECAUSE
MEDICARE WAS PAYING THE HIGHER
PRICE BARD SET.
>> THERE WERE INSTRUCTIONS THAT
I WAS GIVEN TO DO THINGS THAT
CLEARLY WERE INAPPROPRIATE,
PERHAPS ILLEGAL, AND SO WHEN
THOSE THINGS WOULD HAPPEN I
WOULD QUESTION MANAGEMENT ABOUT
IT.
MY HOPE WAS THAT THINGS WOULD BE
RESOLVED.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS THEY DID
NOTHING, SO ACCORDING TO COURT
DOCUMENTS FILED LATER, SHE
REPORTED HER CONCERNS IN AN
ETHICS COMPLAINT TO BARD'S
CORPORATE HEADQUARTERS.
THE COMPANY SENT INVESTIGATORS
TO VISIT THE SITE AND, AT AROUND
THE SAME TIME, SHE ALLEGES HER
SUPERIORS BEGAN MISTREATING HER.
>> I CAME TO FEEL THAT I WAS A
PROBLEM EMPLOYEE.
>> Reporter: YOU CAME TO FEEL
THAT?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: AFTER A YEAR, C.R.
BARD FIRED HER THE WEEK BEFORE
THANKSGIVING.
TWO DAYS LATER, SHE BEGAN
PREPARING A CIVIL WHISTLEBLOWER
LAWSUIT, BECAUSE FEDERAL MONEY
WAS AT STAKE IN ITS ALLEGATION
OF MEDICARE FRAUD, SHE FILED HER
CASE ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED
STATES, AS WELL AS HERSELF.
THE SCHEME SHE ALLEGED WAS
COMPLEX.
HER LAWYER WOULD NEED TO CONNECT
ALL OF THE DOTS AND SHE HAD TO
PROVIDE THE EVIDENCE.
SHE SPENT THE NEXT SEVEN YEARS
FINDING IT BY PORING OVER
DOCUMENTS AND THE CONTENTS OF A
LAPTOP THAT BARD HAD SOLD TO
HER.
IS THAT LIKE, THE LAPTOP?
>> THIS ISTHELAPTOP.
>> Reporter: GOT A BARD STICKER
ON IT THERE.
>> THAT INFORMATION WAS ONLY
AVAILABLE FROM SALES RECORDS
THAT HAPPENED TO BE ON THIS
LAPTOP.
>> Reporter: HER LAWSUIT WAS
FILED UNDER A PROVISION OF
FEDERAL LAW THAT CONGRESS HAD
STRENGTHENED TWENTY YEARS
EARLIER TO ENCOURAGE
WHISTLEBLOWERS.
>> WE DIDN'T KNOWN THAT IT WAS
GOING TO TURN OUT TO BE THE BEST
TOOL THAT EXISTS IN GOVERNMENT
TODAY FOR FIGHTING FRAUD IN
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: IOWA REPUBLICAN
SENATOR CHUCK GRASSLEY WAS A
SPONSOR OF THE WHISTLEBLOWER
REFORM IN 1986.
IT CAME ABOUT AFTER AUDITORS
DISCOVERED THAT THE DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT HAD BEEN BUYING $400
HAMMERS AND $600 TOILET SEATS.
GRASSLEY THOUGHT INDIVIDUAL
AMERICANS MIGHT BE ABLE TO STOP
WASTE AND FRAUD THAT THE
PENTAGON FAILED TO.
>> IT GIVES OUTSIDE PRESSURE AND
OUTSIDE INCENTIVES, EMPOWERING
PEOPLE WHEN GOVERNMENT IS NOT
DOING ITS JOB TO DO ITS JOB.
>> Reporter: THE LAW HAD BEEN ON
THE BOOKS SINCE THE CIVIL WAR.
MILITARY CONTRACTORS HAD
SUPPLIED THE UNION ARMY WITH
SICK HORSES AND MULES, FAULTY
WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION, AND
TAINTED RATIONS.
CONGRESS SENT PRESIDENT ABRAHAM
LINCOLN THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT
WHICH LET WHISTLEBLOWERS FILE
SUIT ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT
AND KEEP A PORTION OF THE
PENALTIES IF A SUIT WAS
SUCCESSFUL.
THE LAW THAT LINCOLN SIGNED WAS
BASED ON A LEGAL CONCEPT THAT
DATES BACK TO MEDIEVAL ENGLAND.
BACK THEN, LAWYERS USED A LATIN
PHRASE TO DESCRIBE IT THAT
MEANS: ONE WHO SUES ON BEHALF OF
THE KING AS WELL AS ONESELF.
TODAY, LAWYERS STILL USE THE
FIRST TWO WORDS OF THAT PHRASE
"QUI TAM" AS THE NAME OF THIS
KIND OF WHISTLEBLOWER LAWSUIT.
IN THE FISCAL YEAR THAT ENDED ON
SEPTEMBER 30, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT RECOVERED $5.69
BILLION UNDER THE FALSE CLAIMS
ACT.
>> YOU CAN'T ARGUE WITH SUCCESS.
YOU CAN'T ARGUE WITH CLOSE TO $6
BILLION THIS FISCAL YEAR, WHICH
IS THE LARGEST AMOUNT WE'VE EVER
RECOVERED.
>> Reporter: JOYCE BRANDA IS IN
CHARGE OF FALSE CLAIMS ACT CASES
AT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
>> I THINK THE SUCCESS OF THE
STATUTE BREEDS SUCCESS.
SO THE MORE CASES ARE FILED AND
THE MORE WE RECOVER UNDER THE
STATUTE, IT GAINS THAT MUCH MORE
NOTORIETY.
>> Reporter: THE SUITS GET
ATTENTION THANKS TO THE AMOUNT
OF MONEY SOME WHISTLEBLOWERS
HAVE MADE, TYPICALLY NO MORE
THAN A QUARTER OF THE MONEY THAT
IS RECOVERED.
DARITY'S SHARE WAS MORE THAN TEN
MILLION DOLLARS WHEN C.R. BARD
PAID MORE THAN $48 MILLION TO
SETTLE THE CASE.
>> THERE'S A SELF INTEREST IN
THIS, IF YOU'RE SUCCESSFUL, THIS
SUIT IS SUCCESSFUL, YOU GET A
CHUNK OF MONEY OUT OF THIS,
YOU'RE NOT DOING THIS OUT OF
PURELY ALTRUISTIC MOTIVES.
>> MY PRIMARY MOTIVATION FOR
THIS WAS FULL VINDICATION.
YES, I WAS COMPENSATED, BUT I
WORKED VERY HARD FOR THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE, WHO RECOVERED
ALMOST $40 MILLION DOLLARS, THEN
THEY GOT ALL MY TAX MONEY, WHICH
WAS SIGNIFICANT, MY LAWYERS GOT
A NICE BIG CHUNK OF IT, AND I
GOT WHAT WAS LEFT.
>> Reporter: DID YOU GET RICH
OFF THIS?
>> WE'RE COMFORTABLE OFF OF
THIS, BUT WE'RE LIVING IN THE
SAME HOME WE LIVED IN FOR ALMOST
EIGHTEEN YEARS, I'M STILL
DRIVING MY HONDA CIVIC HYBRID,
IT'S A 2005 MODEL, NO MASERATI
IN MY GARAGE.
>> Reporter: DARITY'S NOW
WORKING FOR THE SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION HELPING PEOPLE
APPEAL DISABILITY CLAIMS.
EVEN THOUGH THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT
WORKED OUT FOR HER, A FORMER
DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL SAYS IT
NEEDS REFORMING.
>> WHAT OFTEN FOLLOWS LOTS AND
LOTS OF MONEY IS, ARE PROBLEMS
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE PURSUING
MARGINAL, FRIVOLOUS CLAIMS,
BECAUSE THERE'S POTENTIALLY A
BIG PAYDAY AT THE BACK END, AND
THAT IS AN ISSUE.
>> Reporter: DAVID OGDEN HAS
WORKED ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
FALSE CLAIMS ACT, FIRST AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, AND NOW
AT A D.C. LAW FIRM THAT DEFENDS
COMPANIES IN WHISTLEBLOWER
SUITS.
HE ARGUES THAT THE VAST MAJORITY
OF CASES ARE DISMISSED OR
ABANDONED BECAUSE SO MANY ARE
MERITLESS.
HE'S BECOME THE LEADING ADVOCATE
IN A CAMPAIGN BY THE U.S.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE TO REFORM
THE LAW.
OGDEN SAYS THE BIGGEST PROBLEM
WITH THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT IS
THAT IT CAN IMPOSE PENALTIES
THAT ARE OUT OF PROPORTION TO
THE FRAUD A COMPANY MAY HAVE
COMMITTED.
HE ALSO SAYS IT DOESN'T GIVE
COMPANIES ENOUGH OPPORTUNITY TO
FIX PROBLEMS BEFORE THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT GETS INVOLVED.
>> I THINK THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT
IS EXTRAORDINARILY USEFUL AND
HAS REALLY BEEN INNOVATIVE AND
IMPORTANT IN HELPING TO DETECT
FRAUD AFTER IT OCCURS AND
PUNISHING FRAUD AFTER IT OCCURS
AND THEN RECOVERING MONEY FOR
THE GOVERNMENT.
IT'S VERY GOOD AT THAT AND
THAT'S VERY IMPORTANT.
WHAT THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT IS NOT
GOOD AT AND WHAT I THINK NEEDS
TO BE FIXED, AND I THINK THERE'S
AN OPPORTUNITY TO DO IT, IS TO
PREVENT FRAUD BEFORE IT OCCURS.
HE PROPOSES AMENDING THE LAW TO
GRANT IMMUNITY TO A COMPANY IF
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS CERTIFY ITS
FRAUD PREVENTION AND
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION
MEASURES AND IF THE FIRM REPORTS
ANY FRAUD IT FINDS TO THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> IF IT'S A GOOD COMPANY THAT
CARES, AND WANTS TO COMPLY WITH
THE LAW, HAVE THE COMPANIES STOP
IT, HAVE THE COMPANIES REPORT
IT, IF THEY DON'T THEN LET'S
WHACK THEM WITH THE BIG
PENALTIES.
>> Reporter: IOWA REPUBLICAN
SENATOR CHUCK GRASSLEY SAYS THAT
WOULD GUT THE FALSE CLAIMS ACT.
THE ONLY CHANGE HE SUPPORTS IS
ONE TO PREVENT COMPANIES FROM
DEFRAUDING THE GOVERNMENT A
SECOND TIME.
>> HEADS ROLL, YOU DON'T DO
BUSINESS WITH THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT EVER OR FOR A CERTAIN
PERIOD OF TIME.
>> Reporter: HIT THEM WHERE IT
HURTS ON THE BOTTOM LINE,
BASICALLY?
>> YES.
IF YOU LIKE DOING BUSINESS WITH
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, YOU
OUGHT TO DO IT IN A HONEST WAY,
NOT IN A FRAUDULENT WAY.
IF YOU DO IT IN A FRAUDULENT
WAY, THERE OUGHT TO BE A PRICE
TO BE PAID.
>> Reporter: FOR, C.R. BARD,
THAT PRICE WAS NEARLY $50
MILLION.
BUT JULIE DARITY SAYS SHE PAID A
PRICE, TOO.
DID YOU THINK, AT SOME POINT, OH
MY GOD I'M ONE OF THOSE WHISTLE
BLOWERS?
NEGATIVE CONNOTATION, BUT I
>> I DID, AND IT'S GOT SUCH A
WOULD THINK MOST PEOPLE ARE LIKE
ME, AND IT'S A VERY PAINFUL
PROCESS, IT'S NOT EASY, YOU'RE A
PARIAH.
>> Reporter: NO REGRETS?
>> NO REGRETS.
BECAUSE IT WAS THE RIGHT THING
TO DO.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WERE THE
BIGGEST PAYOUTS TO
WHISTLEBLOWERS IN 2014?
FIND OUT ON OUR WEBSITE AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY WE
TOLD YOU THAT THE NATIONAL LABOR
RELATIONS BOARD FILED FORMAL
COMPLAINTS AGAINST McDONALD'S
AND SOME OF ITS FRANCHISEES.
TO UNPACK THIS STORY FURTHER,
WE'RE JOINED NOW BY STEVEN
GREENHOUSE.
UNTIL THIS PAST WEEK, HE WAS A
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES WHO COVERED LABOR ISSUES
AMONG OTHER THINGS.
SO WHAT IS THE NRLB ALLEGE THAT
McDONALD'S OR ITS FRANCHISES
DID?
>> THE LABOR BOARD SAID THAT
McDONALD'S AND MANY OF ITS
FRANCHISEES AROUND THE
COUNTRY IMPROPERLY RETALIATED
AGAINST, SPIED ON WORKERS WHO
PARTICIPATED IN THIS FIGHT FOR
15, DEMANDING BASICALLY $15 AN
HOUR AT FAST-FOOD RESTAURANTS
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THERE IS
USUALLY A DISTINCTION BETWEEN
McDONALD'S, THE OWNING FRANCHISE
OR I GUESS THE BRAND AND ALL OF
THE FRANCHISEES.
BUT WHY ARE THEY LUMPED TOGETHER
IN THIS?
>> WELL, IT'S REALLY GOTTEN
UNDER McDONALD'S AND THE
BUSINESS COMMUNITY'S SKIN IS THE
GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE NATIONAL
LABOR RELATIONS BOARD IS SAYING
McDONALD'S IS A JOINT EMPLOYER
WITH ITS FRANCHISEES.
IT'S SAYING THAT A FRANCHISE
THAT MIGHT HAVE 30 EMPLOYEES AND
OFTEN ACTS AS IF THE FRANCHISE
OWNER AM THE ONLY EMPLOYER, THE
NRLB IS SAYING McDONALD'S
EXERCISES SO MUCH INFLUENCE OVER
THE RESTAURANTS, TELLING THEM,
YOU KNOW, WITH ALL SORTS OF
REQUIREMENTS ABOUT HOW TO COOK,
HOW TO KEEP THINGS CLEAN, WAYS
TO HANDLE YOUR EMPLOYEES, THE
N.R.L.B. SAID McDONALD'S, YOU
ARE A JOINT EMPLOYER AND FOR
McDONALD'S THAT IS QUITE BAD
NEWS BECAUSE IT MEANS IF A
FRANCHISE OWNER IS CHARGED WITH
NOT PAYING OVERTIME OR IF HE IS
CHARGED WITH RETALIATING AGAINST
SOMEONE FOR EXERCISING HIS
RIGHTS TO FORM A UNION, NOT JUST
THE FRANCHISE OPERATOR WILL BE
ACCUSED AND CHARGED, BUT
McDONALD'S ITSELF CAN BE HELD
JOINTLY RESPONSIBLE.
SO THIS HAS REPERCUSSIONS BEYOND
McDONALD'S THEN?
>> YEAH SO, THIS SENT SHOCKWAVES
THROUGH FRANCHISE INDUSTRIES
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
YOU KNOW, RESTAURANTS,
RETAILERS, I GUESS AUTO LUBE
COMPANIES, ALL SORTS OF
COMPANIES.
AND THEN ON FRIDAY, THERE WAS
THIS BIG NEWS CONFERENCE WITH
THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, THE
NATIONAL RETAIL FEDERATION, THE
INTERNATIONAL FRANCHISE
ASSOCIATION AND NATIONAL
RESTAURANT ASSOCIATION.
THEY ARE UPSET AND THEY REALLY
WANT TO PERSUADE THE COURTS.
THEY WANT TO PERSUADE CONGRESS
TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT THIS
N.R.L.B. ACTION.
>> Sreenivasan: SO NOW IT GOES
IN FRONT OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE
LAW JUDGE WHAT DOES THAT MEAN,
WHAT ARE THE NEXT STEPS IN THIS
FIGHT?
>> SO THESE ARE ONLY
ALLEGATIONS.
THIS IS CIVIL, NOT CRIMINAL.
SO A JUDGE WILL HEAR IT AND IF
THE JUDGE RULES AGAINST
McDONALD'S, THEN THE COUNSEL
WILL LIKELY APPEAL TO THE FIVE
PERSON N.R.L.B. IN WASHINGTON
AND PROBABLY TO THE FEDERAL
COURTS.
UNIONS ARE VERY, VERY
HAPPY ABOUT WHAT THE THEY DID
BECAUSE IT MEANS THAT THIS GIVES
THEM MUCH MORE LEVERAGE PRESSURE
AGAINST McDONALD'S AND ITS
FRANCHISEES.
>> Sreenivasan: STEVEN
GREENHOUSE, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> SURE, GREAT TO BE HERE.
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU.
YOUR FEEDBACK ABOUT SOME OF OUR
RECENT WORK.
MANY OF YOU WROTE US ABOUT LAST
NIGHT'S SIGNATURE PIECE
DESCRIBING THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT
A MOSQUE BEING OPENED IN ONE
GEORGIA TOWN.
A FEW SYMPATHIZED WITH OPPONENTS
OF THE PLAN.
VIRGINIA LEE SAID, "CAN'T HELP
WANTING TO EXCLUDE MUSLIM
FUNDAMENTALISTS FROM OUR
COUNTRY.
THEIR RULES CONCERNING WOMEN ARE
DISGUSTING AND SEEN TO
CONTRAVENE OUR LAWS.
ACCEPT OUR CULTURE OR DON'T
COME."
BACHCOLE ADDED THIS, "IF THE
MUSLIMS DO NOT PLEDGE THEIR
BELIEF IN FREEDOM OF RELIGION,
THEN DEPORT THEM.
IF THEY DO PLEDGE THEIR BELIEF
IN FREEDOM OF RELIGION, THEN I
DON'T CARE WHERE THEY SET UP
THEIR MOSQUE."
ONE VIEWER SAID, "MEDIA COVERAGE
OF TERROR ACTS BY MUSLIM
EXTREMISTS OVERSEAS DISTORTS
AMERICANS' VIEWS OF MUSLIMS.
THIS IS WHAT HAPPENS WHEN ONE
TERRORIST GROUP AFTER ANOTHER
ENGAGES IN MASS MURDER AND
DESTRUCTION IN THE NAME OF
ISLAM.
THE MEDIA REPORTS ALL OF THESE
ATROCITIES AND THIS IS WHAT IS
SEEN.
THE REASON WE HAVE SUCH BACKLASH
AGAINST MUSLIMS HAS TO DO WITH
THE NARRATIVE, AND THAT IS THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MEDIA AS
WELL AS MUSLIMS THEMSELVES.
GOOD MUSLIMS NEED TO WORK THAT
MUCH HARDER TO EDUCATE OTHERS."
BUT MOST OF YOU DEFENDED THE
RIGHT OF AMERICAN MUSLIMS TO
WORSHIP, AS THEY PLEASE.
ANGELA MORRISON WROTE, "SORRY
FOLKS.
YOU EITHER BELIEVE IN FREEDOM OF
RELIGION AND THE CONSTITUTION OR
YOU DON'T.
YOU DON'T GET TO PICK AND
CHOOSE."
A.K. SAID, "WE ARE FULL
FUNCTIONING HYPOCRITES.
WE LOVE FREE SPEECH UNTIL WE
DISLIKE WHAT IS BEING SAID.
WE LOVE FREEDOM OF RELIGION AS
LONG AS IT IS OUR RELIGION."
AND GREG COSTELLO ADDED THIS,
"I'VE LIVED NEXT DOOR, LITERALLY
20 YARDS AWAY, FROM A MOSQUE FOR
THE PAST FOUR YEARS HAVEN'T HAD
A SINGLE BAD ENCOUNTER.
PEOPLE FEAR WHAT THEY DON'T
KNOW.
THEY FEAR PEOPLE WHO ARE
DIFFERENT.
AS ALWAYS, VISIT US ONLINE AT
newshour.pbs.org, TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR, AND VISIT THE
NEWSHOUR FACEBOOK PAGE.
SOME LATE NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU TONIGHT.
A DRIVER SHOUTING "ALLAHU
AKBAR"-- ARABIC FOR "GOD IS
GREAT"-- DROVE HIS CAR INTO
CROWDS OF PEOPLE AT FIVE
DIFFERENT LOCATIONS IN DIJON,
FRANCE, INJURING 11 PEOPLE.
YESTERDAY ANOTHER MAN SHOUTING
THE SAME SLOGAN STABBED THREE
POLICEMAN IN A TOWN IN CENTRAL
FRANCE BEFORE BEING SHOT DEAD.
BOTH MEN WERE DESCRIBED AS
UNSTABLE.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.